README.md, before:

# stokes-implicit

This is a planned glacier model combining Stokes momentum balance and coupled,
implicitly-updated geometry.  It is started from the Firedrake Stokes model with
explicitly-updated geometry described in my [mccarthy/stokes/](https://github.com/bueler/mccarthy/tree/master/stokes) repo.

The code uses [Firedrake](https://www.firedrakeproject.org/), and thus [PETSc](http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/) under the hood.  Mesh generation is by [Gmsh](http://gmsh.info/) and solution visualization by [Paraview](https://www.paraview.org/).

## installation

  * Install [Gmsh](http://gmsh.info/) and [Paraview](https://www.paraview.org/),
    for instance by installing Debian or OSX packages.
  * Follow the instructions at the
    [Firedrake download page](https://www.firedrakeproject.org/download.html)
    to install Firedrake.
  * Most users will only need the PETSc which is installed by Firedrake.  Any
    separate PETSc installation should (generally) not be used in the Firedrake
    install.

## usage

FIXME Generate the domain geometry and the mesh:

        $ ./gendomain.py -o glacier.geo  # domain outline
        $ gmsh -2 glacier.geo            # mesh domain; generates glacier.msh

FIXME Start Firedrake and run the solver:

        $ source ~/firedrake/bin/activate
        (firedrake) $ ./flow.py glacier.msh

FIXME This writes variables (velocity,pressure) into `glacier.pvd`.  Now visualize:

        (firedrake) $ paraview glacier.pvd

Commit message:

update documentation (in prep for making repo public)

README.md, after:

# stokes-implicit

This 3D glacier model combines Stokes momentum balance and coupled, implicitly-computed ice geometry.  Conservation of energy, sliding, floating ice, and bedrock motion are not modeled.  The numerical method uses tetrahedral finite elements on an extruded mesh, with stable and aspect-ratio robust Q2 x Q1 mixed elements for the velocity x pressure spaces.

The code uses [Firedrake](https://www.firedrakeproject.org/), and thus [PETSc](http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/) under the hood.  Mesh generation is by [Gmsh](http://gmsh.info/) and solution visualization by [Paraview](https://www.paraview.org/).

## installation

  * Install [Gmsh](http://gmsh.info/) and [Paraview](https://www.paraview.org/), perhaps by installing packages.
  * Follow the instructions at the [Firedrake download page](https://www.firedrakeproject.org/download.html) to install Firedrake.
  * Most users will only need the PETSc which is installed by Firedrake.  A separate PETSc installation may be less convenient.

## usage

The solver default mode uses a dome geometry computed from the Halfar (1981,1983) solutions of the shallow ice approximation.  Thus no mesh-generation is needed.

For the simplest version start Firedrake and run the solver to compute a single time step:

        $ source ~/firedrake/bin/activate
        (firedrake) $ ./stokesi.py -o dome.pvd

This 2D computation uses an extruded mesh with only 30x4=120 quadrilateral elements.  It writes variables (velocity,pressure,displacement) into `dome.pvd`.  Visualize:

        (firedrake) $ paraview dome.pvd

The following parallel 3D computation uses an extruded mesh with 30x30x8=7200 tetrahedral elements and N=207k degrees of freedom.  It takes a few minutes:

        (firedrake) $ mpiexec -n 6 ./stokesi.py -mx 30 -my 30 -vertrefine 1 -s_snes_rtol 1.0e-3 -s_snes_monitor -s_ksp_converged_reason -saveextra -o dome3.pvd

Note that rich diagnostic information is generated with `-saveextra` including the full deviatoric stress tensor and also (for comparison) the SIA velocities.

FIXME Generate some other domain geometry and the mesh:

        $ gmsh -3 glacier.geo

## performance

FIXME multigrid schemes based on semicoarsening; see fixed-boundary analog in `pool.py`

## older version

There is a related Firedrake Stokes model with explicitly-updated geometry in my McCarthy Summer School notes repository [mccarthy/stokes/](https://github.com/bueler/mccarthy/tree/master/stokes).
